  Framework on
Outsourcing to Cloud
 Service Providers
       STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN




             JANUARY 16, 2023
   BANKING POLICY & REGULATIONS DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


                                                              Table of Contents

A.   ABBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................................................................... 2
B.   DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................................................ 4
C.   STATUS OF PREVIOUS REGULATORY INSTRUCTIONS........................................................................... 7
D.   PURPOSE, SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY ........................................................................................................ 7
E.   PERMISSIBLE CLOUD OUTSOURCING ARRANGEMENTS ...................................................................... 7
F.   GOVERNANCE .......................................................................................................................................................... 8
G.   DUE DILIGENCE OF CLOUD SERVICE PROVIDER...................................................................................... 9
H.   OVERSIGHT ............................................................................................................................................................. 10
I.   CONTINGENCY PLANNING ............................................................................................................................... 10
J.   RIGHT TO AUDIT, ACCESS AND INFORMATION ...................................................................................... 11
K.   EXIT PLANNING.....................................................................................................................................................11
L.   SUB-CONTRACTING .............................................................................................................................................12
M. USER ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND AUTHENTICATION ...................................................................... 12
N.   CHANGE AND CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT.................................................................................... 13
O.   INCIDENT MANAGEMENT ................................................................................................................................ 13
P.   DATA SECURITY .................................................................................................................................................... 14
Q.   CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY MANAGEMENT ....................................................................................................... 14
R.   TOKENIZATION ..................................................................................................................................................... 15
S.   NETWORK ARCHITECTURE .............................................................................................................................15
T.   SECURITY TESTING .............................................................................................................................................15
U.   SECURITY EVENT MONITORING .................................................................................................................... 16
V.   OTHER REQUIREMENTS.................................................................................................................................... 16




                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 18
                               Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


A. ABBREVIATIONS

AI          Artificial Intelligence
BCP         Business Continuity Plan
BoD         Board of Directors
BPRD        Banking Policy & Regulations Department
CM          Change Management
CNIC        Computerized National Identity Card
CO          Cloud Outsourcing
CSP         Cloud Service Provider
DB          Digital Bank
DDoS        Distributed Denial of Service
DoS         Denial of Service
DFI         Development Finance Institution
DR          Disaster Recovery
EMI         Electronic Money Institution
FI          Financial Institution
HA          High Availability
HSM         Hardware Security Module
IA          Internal Audit
IaaS        Infrastructure as a Service
IDS         Intrusion Detection System
IP          Internet Protocol
IPS         Intrusion Prevention System
IT          Information Technology
ITSC        Information Technology Steering Committee
KPI         Key Performance Indicator
KRI         Key Risk Indicator
MFA         Multifactor Authentication
MFB         Microfinance Bank
ML          Machine Learning
PaaS        Platform as a Service
PIN         Personal Identification Number
PSO         Payment System Operator
PSP         Payment Service Provider
PSP&OD      Payment Systems Policy & Oversight Department
RE          Regulated Entity
SaaS        Software as a Service
SBP         State Bank of Pakistan
SEM         Security Event Monitoring
SIEM        Security Information and Event Management
SIRT        Security Incident Response Team
SLA         Service Level Agreement


                                                                       Page 2 of 18
                                Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


SOC          Security Operations Center
SOC Report   System & Organization Controls Report
ToR          Terms of Reference
UAT          User Acceptance Testing
VPN          Virtual Private Network
WAF          Web Application Firewall




                                                                        Page 3 of 18
                                  Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


B. DEFINITIONS

Availability             Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information.
                         A documented set of specifications for an information system, or a
                         configuration item within a system, that has been formally
Baseline
                         reviewed and agreed on at a given point in time, and which can be
                         changed only through change control procedures.
                         Cloud computing services for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-
                         demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing
                         resources (e.g. networks, servers, storage, applications, and
                         services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal
Cloud services
                         management effort or service provider interaction. The essential
                         characteristics of these services include on-demand self-service,
                         broad network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity and
                         measured service.
                         Means a service provider responsible for delivering cloud services
                         under an outsourcing arrangement, and meeting the following
                         requirements:
                         a) At least five (5) years of experience in delivering cloud services
Cloud service provider   with impeccable track record
                         b) Have third party certifications / assessments related to IT
                         service delivery, business continuity & disaster recovery, and cyber
                         / information security
                         c) Have at least Tier III certified data centers
                         A cloud deployment model where the cloud infrastructure is
                         provisioned for exclusive use by a specific community of consumers
                         from organizations that have shared concerns (e.g. mission,
Community cloud          security requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). It
                         may be owned, managed, and operated by one or more of the
                         organizations in the community, a third party, or some combination
                         of them, and it may exist on or off premises.
                         Preserving authorized restrictions on information access and
Confidentiality          disclosures, including means for protecting personal privacy and
                         proprietary information.
                         A collection of activities focused on establishing and maintaining
                         the integrity of information technology products and information
Configuration
                         systems, through control of processes for initializing, changing, and
management
                         monitoring the configurations of those products and systems
                         throughout the system development life cycle.
                         An attack, via cyberspace, targeting an enterprise’s use of
                         cyberspace for the purpose of disrupting, disabling, destroying, or
Cyber-attack             maliciously controlling a computing environment/infrastructure;
                         or destroying the integrity of the data or stealing controlled
                         information.
                         The ability to protect or defend the use of cyberspace from cyber-
Cybersecurity
                         attacks.
                         A cybersecurity event that has been determined to have an impact
Cybersecurity incident
                         on organization prompting the need for response and recovery.
                         A global domain within the information environment consisting of
                         the interdependent network of information system infrastructures
Cyberspace
                         including the internet, telecommunication networks, computer
                         systems, and embedded processors and controllers.



                                                                                  Page 4 of 18
                                   Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


Designated Payment        Refer to PSOs / PSPs, which are designated as Systemically
System Operators /        Important Payment System, under Payment Systems Designation
Payment Service           Framework issued vide PSD Circular No. 02 of 2017, amended from
Providers                 time to time.
                          A cloud deployment model where the cloud infrastructure is a
                          composition of two or more distinct cloud infrastructures (private,
Hybrid cloud              community, or public) that remain unique entities, but are bound
                          together by standardized or proprietary technology that enables
                          data and application portability.
                          An attack in which an adversary takes malicious control over the
Hyper jacking             hypervisor that creates the virtual environment within a virtual
                          machine host.
                          An occurrence that actually or potentially jeopardizes the
                          confidentiality, integrity, or availability of an information system or
Incident                  the information the system processes, stores, or transmits or that
                          constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of security
                          policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies.
                          A collection of information, either tangible or intangible, that is
Information assets
                          worth protecting.
                          The protection of information and information systems from
                          unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or
Information security
                          destruction in order to provide confidentiality, integrity, and
                          availability.
                          A cloud service model where the consumer is provided capability
                          to provision processing, storage, networks and other fundamental
                          computing resources where the consumer is able to deploy and run
Infrastructure as a       arbitrary software, which can include operating systems and
Service                   applications. The consumer does not manage or control the
                          underlying cloud infrastructure but has control over operating
                          systems, storage and deployed applications; and possibly limited
                          control to select networking components (e.g. host firewalls).
                          Guarding against improper information modification or
Integrity                 destruction, and including ensuring information non-repudiation
                          and authenticity.
                          IT change management is a process designed to understand and
IT change                 minimize risks while making IT changes. It is responsible for
management                ensuring that IT changes are recorded, evaluated, planned, tested,
                          implemented, and reviewed in a controlled manner.
                          Authentication using two or more different factors to achieve
                          authentication. Factors include: (i) something you know (e.g.,
Multi factor
                          password/PIN); (ii) something you have (e.g., cryptographic
authentication
                          identification device, token); or (iii) something you are (e.g.,
                          biometric).
                          A testing methodology in which assessors, typically working under
Penetration testing       specific constraints, attempt to circumvent or defeat the security
                          features of an information system.
                          As defined under ‘Framework for Risk Management in Outsourcing
Personally Identifiable
                          Arrangements by Financial Institutions’ issued vide BPRD Circular
Information
                          No. 06 of 2017 and amended vide BPRD Circular No. 06 of 2019.
                          A cloud service model where the consumer is provided capability
                          to deploy onto the cloud infrastructure consumer-created or
Platform as a Service
                          acquired applications created using programming languages,
                          libraries, services, and tools supported by the provider. The

                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                                 Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


                        consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud
                        infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, or
                        storage, but has control over the deployed applications and
                        possibly configuration settings for the application-hosting
                        environment.
                        A cloud deployment model where the cloud infrastructure is
                        provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization comprising
Private cloud           multiple consumers (e.g. business units). It may be owned,
                        managed, and operated by the organization, a third party, or some
                        combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.
                        A user that is authorized (and therefore, trusted) to perform
Privilege user          security-relevant functions that ordinary users are not authorized
                        to perform.
                        A cloud deployment model where the cloud infrastructure is
                        provisioned for open use by the general public. It may be owned,
Public cloud            managed, and operated by a business, academic, or government
                        organization, or some combination of them. It exists on the
                        premises of the cloud service provider.
Recovery point          The point in time to which data must be recovered after an outage.
objective
                        Banks, MFBs, DFIs, DBs, EMIs, PSOs, PSPs, and designated
Regulate entities
                        PSOs/PSPs.
                        Security event monitoring provides real-time monitoring,
Security event
                        correlation and analysis of activity in the environment, detecting
monitoring
                        and alerting on valid threats to the data and devices.
                        A cloud service model where the consumer is provided capability
                        to use the provider’s applications running on a cloud infrastructure.
                        The applications are accessible from various client devices through
                        either a thin client interface, such as a web browser, or a program
Software as a Service   interface. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying
                        cloud infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems,
                        storage, or even individual application capabilities, with the
                        possible exception of limited user specific application configuration
                        settings.
                        Linked set of resources and processes between multiple tiers of
                        developers that begins with the sourcing of products and services,
Supply chain            and extends through the design, development, manufacturing,
                        processing, handling, and delivery of products and services to the
                        acquirer.
                        Tokenization is a process of replacing actual sensitive data
Tokenization            elements with non-sensitive data that has no correlation with the
                        dataset.
                        Protected information system link utilizing tunneling, security
Virtual private
                        controls, and endpoint address translation giving the impression of
network
                        a dedicated line.
                        A weakness, susceptibility or flaw of an asset or control that can be
Vulnerability
                        exploited by one or more threats.
                        Systematic examination of an information system or product to
                        determine the adequacy of security measures, identify security
Vulnerability
                        deficiencies, provide data from which to predict the effectiveness of
assessment
                        proposed security measures, and confirm the adequacy of such
                        measures after implementation.


                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
                                     Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


C. STATUS OF PREVIOUS REGULATORY INSTRUCTIONS
This framework shall have an overriding effect on cloud related directions prescribed under the
following regulatory instructions:
   1. Section 4.4 ‘Cloud Computing’ of ‘Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management
      Framework for Financial Institutions’ issued vide BPRD Circular No. 05 of 2017 and
      amended vide BPRD Circular No. 04 of 2020 on ‘Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers
      (CSPs)’.
   2. ‘Framework for Risk Management in Outsourcing Arrangements by Financial Institutions’
      issued vide BPRD Circular No. 06 of 2019.

D. PURPOSE, SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
   1. This framework sets out minimum requirements for REs to outsource their material and
      non-material workloads to CSPs. However, certain requirements which are applicable
      only on the material workloads have been specifically mentioned. Further, REs are
      encouraged to put in place control measures over and above the specified requirements.
   2. This framework shall:
      a) Apply to all REs;
      b) Cover all types of cloud service models (i.e. SaaS, PaaS and IaaS);
      c) Be applicable on all types of cloud deployment models (i.e. public, private, community,
          and hybrid).

E. PERMISSIBLE CLOUD OUTSOURCING ARRANGEMENTS
   1. For the purpose of these regulations, material workload means all systems, applications,
      and services that are fundamental for carrying out business of an RE, and if disrupted,
      have the potential to significantly impact an institution’s business operations, reputation
      or profitability.
   2. REs may outsource their workloads to CSPs in the following manner:
      a) All type of workloads (i.e. material and non-material) may be outsourced to reputable
          onshore (i.e. domestic) CSPs;
      b) EMIs, non-designated PSOs/ PSPs may outsource their material and non-material
          workloads to offshore (i.e. outside Pakistan) CSPs;
      c) Banks, MFBs, DBs, DFIs and designated PSOs/PSPs may outsource their non-material
          workloads to offshore CSPs. However, outsourcing of their material workloads to
          offshore CSPs shall be subject to SBP approval whereby SBP may grant approval on
          case to case basis, after considering the following:
              i. Systemic implications of the CO arrangement
             ii. Institution specific risks
           iii. Legal and other strategic risks
            iv. Data processing and storage
             v. Availability and quality of services
            vi. Security and other controls
           vii. Contingency and exit planning
          viii. Resilience
            ix. Sub-contracting
             x. Assurance mechanism
            xi. Role and responsibilities



                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
                                      Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


        d) For approval to outsource material workloads to offshore CSPs, banks, MFBs, DBs and
            DFIs shall submit their request to BPRD whereas designated PSOs/PSPs shall submit
            it to PSP&OD;
        e) While granting approval to banks, MFBs, DBs, DFIs and designated PSOs/PSPs, SBP
            may impose additional terms and conditions over and above the requirements of this
            framework;
        f) For CO arrangements, REs may use any service and deployment model as per their
            requirements and risk appetite;
        g) REs shall give preference to onshore CSPs for outsourcing their workloads;
        h) REs shall not process and store their data in unfriendly or hostile jurisdictions;
   3.   Outsourcing of services to CSPs does not absolve the REs from their prime responsibilities
        including managing and running the business operations effectively, legal and regulatory
        compliance, and protection of customers’ data.
   4.   SBP may instruct any RE to restrict outsourcing of their workloads to CSPs due to its
        systemic impact, unacceptable risks and any other concerns.
   5.   REs shall submit details of their CO arrangements to SBP, as and when required.
   6.   SBP may instruct REs to shift their cloud based workloads to SBP designated onshore
        community cloud as and when the same is available.

F. GOVERNANCE
The structure and processes for managing CO arrangement are vital for maximizing the benefits,
and managing the associated risks. REs planning to outsource their workloads to CSPs need to
consider adapting their organizational structure for effective and efficient oversight of CSPs,
specifically pertaining to performance, operational effectiveness of controls and remediation. In
this regard, REs shall ultimately be responsible and accountable for all of its information assets
hosted on CSPs, and comply with the following requirements:
   1. Develop a comprehensive policy for CO duly approved by their BoD. In this regard, the
      REs can also amend their existing ‘Policy for Outsourcing Arrangements’ to
      include/update CO. The policy shall encompass all services, as per requirements provided
      in section E above that can be outsourced to CSP, and at least include all those aspects that
      have been prescribed in this framework.
   2. Conduct appropriate due diligence of CSPs and proactively identify any risks emanating
      from their CO arrangements including risks associated with sub-contracting by CSPs.
   3. Update their Enterprise Risk Management framework or other relevant policies for
      effective oversight and management of risks emanating from the CO arrangement(s). The
      framework shall include sub-contracting risks, assessment of cloud service location(s)
      especially if outside Pakistan with specific focus on areas including but not limited to legal
      aspects; regulatory issues; jurisdictional concerns; availability; security and resilience of
      information assets and services; connectivity; political and security situation; ease of
      oversight; plausibility of RE, SBP and external audit staff to travel for onsite assessment/
      audit or alternate assurance mechanism.
   4. Delegate cloud specific governance responsibilities such as for overseeing adherence to
      regulatory as well as performance requirements, including cloud service SLAs, reviewing
      of KPIs and KRIs, incidents (including cybersecurity incidents) and other relevant matters
      to the ITSC. In this regard, the ToRs of ITSC shall be suitably amended to include these
      responsibilities.
   5. Undertake all CO arrangements through legally binding SLAs, which shall at least include
      the areas prescribed in Appendix – I. These SLAs must be vetted by the legal function of
      the RE and be executed by the REs (except branches of foreign banks) themselves instead

                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                                      Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


      of their parent company or subsidiary, with governing law preferably as law of Pakistan.
      However, compliance with the laws of Pakistan, along with compliance to any legal
      obligation as prescribed by the host country of the CSP, shall be mandatory at all times.
   6. Define and agree upon the roles and responsibilities of the IT and operational
      departments (e.g. requirement analysis, performance testing, UAT, responsibility for data
      validation, etc.), before transferring information assets and services to a CSP.
   7. Ensure that the CO arrangements are compliant with the relevant legal and regulatory
      requirements, and the IA functions of the REs shall provide independent certification to
      their BoDs in this regard.

G. DUE DILIGENCE OF CLOUD SERVICE PROVIDER
REs shall exercise reasonable care before entering into CO arrangements. To ensure effective
management of the associated risks, REs shall conduct reasonable due diligence of the CSPs and
their material sub-contracting arrangements by using defined criteria which shall include the
following:
   1. Evaluation of feasibility of CO arrangements including cost effectiveness, quality of
       service, and legal / regulatory / compliance risks.
   2. Ability of CSP to meet legal and regulatory requirements of Pakistan.
   3. Assessment of financial strength and resources.
   4. Competence, business structure, experience, track record in delivering such services.
   5. Assessment of CSPs ability to comply with necessary minimum controls including
       physical security / internal controls based on the intended workloads, especially with
       respect to confidentiality, integrity, availability and resilience.
   6. Assessment of corporate governance and entity level controls.
   7. Assessment of CSPs ability to provide REs the control over data residency enabling them
       to shift over preferred data center instance, depending upon the cloud service model, in
       order to host these services at such locations/countries/regions considering geopolitical
       risks.
   8. Cybersecurity and IT capabilities including adherence to international standards and best
       practices.
   9. Sub-contracting risk management.
   10. Data security related controls.
   11. Access, audit and information rights of REs, SBP and external auditors of the REs.
   12. Support services.
   13. Contingency, resilience and exit arrangements.
   14. Up to date certification and attestation of the CSPs including but not limited to IT service
       delivery, business continuity & disaster recovery, cyber / information security, and data
       center Tier III certification.
   15. Liability of claims / penalties on CSPs for:
       a) Unauthorized transactions;
       b) Service disruptions;
       c) Security breaches;
       d) Enforcement and penal actions that may be taken by regulatory and legal authorities
          against the REs for not complying the regulatory and legal requirements, due to faults
          by CSPs.
   16. For material workloads:
      a) Threat & Vulnerability Assessment or equivalent independent assessments of data
          centers to identify the security and operational weaknesses. The scope of such
          assessments shall include physical and environmental security, perimeter security,

                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                                       Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


           access controls, security & emergency procedures, monitoring, redundancy, natural
           disasters, and the political and economic climate of the country in which the data
           center resides. The assessment shall cover all data centers where the REs’ data /
           systems will reside;
        b) Independent assessments instead of solely relying on attestations by the CSPs, and the
           results shall be reviewed by REs’ IA as well as Information Security (IS) function.
           However, the REs may consider SOC Reports (level 1, 2 & 3).

H. OVERSIGHT
The risk exposures and effectiveness of the corresponding controls may vary over the tenure of
the CO arrangements. In this regard, REs shall:
     1. Develop and maintain an effective oversight mechanism including but not limited to the
        assessment of performance against desired service levels and ongoing viability of the CSP
        and its services, cybersecurity practices and controls, changes in service location(s), sub-
        contracting, change of ownership, control environment; and timely response to emerging
        risks and issues.
     2. On an ongoing basis, review and monitor the CSP’s compliance with legal, regulatory and
        contractual obligations.
     3. Monitor access to their cloud data/workloads, wherever possible such as through cloud
        activity reports.
     4. Review internal control assessment / audit reports of the CSPs, in order to obtain
        assurance regarding the security and resilience.
     5. For material workload, conduct comprehensive audit of the CSPs, either themselves or
        through third party assessors / pooled audits, at least once in two years. The scope of the
        audit shall at least include the infrastructure and related software used to deliver cloud
        services to the RE. However, in case where audit/onsite assessment cannot be conducted
        due to a valid reason(s), REs may rely on internationally recognized third party
        certifications and reports made available by the CSPs, after sufficient understanding and
        review of their scope, methodology and the ability of the assessors.

I.   CONTINGENCY PLANNING
REs shall develop contingency plan for their CO workloads in order to deal with any
disruption/degradation of cloud related services. The contingency plan shall take into account all
possible scenarios regarding the unavailability of CSP related services due to various reasons
such as technical/connectivity issues, inability of CSP to provide services due to legal actions in
their respective jurisdictions, etc. In this regard, REs shall:
     1. Prudently select appropriate implementation option (service and deployment model,
        availability zones, server/server-less, etc.) along with related communication
        technologies, to offer better resilience that commensurate with their workload.
     2. Maximize the redundancy by design and workload distribution, and implement health
        and monitoring checks for ensuring HA of their cloud workloads.
     3. Ensure redundant and robust connectivity arrangements through different international
        internet cables and include penalties for disruption and downtimes in their agreements.
     4. Define clear roles and responsibilities including responsibility for signing off, updating
        and activating the contingency plan.
     5. Periodically review and update the contingency plan, taking into account developments
        which may affect their feasibility. These may include increase in number of availability


                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
                                        Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


        zones, changes in business requirements, new viable alternate CSPs, technological
        changes, etc.
     6. Periodically (at least once annually) test the contingency plan against various scenarios
        including disruption of internet / communication services, unavailability of CSP, etc.
        Where possible, REs may conduct collaborative testing of their contingency plan with
        their CSPs. Further, the REs shall ensure that the deficiencies identified during testing are
        recorded and corrective actions are implemented.

J.   RIGHT TO AUDIT, ACCESS AND INFORMATION
REs shall ensure that CO does not hinder SBP in conducting its supervisory functions. In this
regard, the REs shall comply with the following requirements:
     1. Ensure that their internal & external auditors/ independent assessors and SBP have right
        to conduct audits and onsite assessments of the CSP and its sub-contractors, if required.
        Further, there should be no restriction or prohibition on access to REs’ cloud related
        information assets and services for the RE, its auditors, independent assessors or SBP’s
        authorized staff or such visits are otherwise not impractical.
     2. Ensure that access, audit and information rights provided through the contractual
        arrangement include where relevant:
        a) Premises, data, devices, information, systems, and networks used for providing the
            cloud services or monitoring its performance. These may include CSP’s (and its sub-
            contractors) policies, processes, and controls;
        b) Results of security testing carried out by CSP or on its behalf, on its applications, data,
            and systems to assess the effectiveness of the implemented cybersecurity processes
            and controls;
        c) Results of security testing carried out by the sub-contractors or on its behalf, on its
            applications, data, and systems, where applicable, to ascertain effectiveness of the
            cybersecurity processes and controls;
        d) Company and financial information;
        e) CSPs’ external auditors, personnel, and premises.
     3. In case, where audit/onsite assessment cannot be conducted for a valid reason(s), REs
        may rely on internationally recognized third party certifications, and reports made
        available by the CSP. However, reliance on these third party certifications and reports
        shall be supported by adequate understanding and review of the scope, the methodology
        applied therein and the ability of the third party and CSP to clarify matters relating to the
        assessment. Further, the REs shall have contractual right to request for the expansion of
        the scope of the certifications / assessments / audits to cover relevant controls and
        systems.
     4. Ensure that CSPs timely provide any information requested by SBP, whenever required.
     5. Follow up with the CSP to ensure that all appropriate and timely remediation actions are
        taken to address any audit findings.

K. EXIT PLANNING
REs shall develop an exit plan by considering the materiality and impact of their workloads
outsourced to CSPs. In this regard, REs shall comply with the following requirements:
     1. Ensure that the exit plan covers scenarios for stressed and non-stressed exit
        circumstances.



                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
                                      Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


   2. Ensure that the exit plan has defined trigger events, alternative solutions, transition plans,
      and roles and responsibilities including responsibility for signing off, updating and
      activating the plan.
   3. Periodically review and test the exit plan, taking into account developments which may
      affect its feasibility.
   4. Implement measures including but not limited to contractual or escrow arrangements, to
      ensure continuity of critical business services in case of exit.
   5. Ensure complete removal of data including logs from all locations of CSP in case of exit.
   6. To avoid the lock-in and dependency risks, REs shall in their CO arrangement contracts:
      a) Avoid inclusion of any lock-in clause or exclusivity arrangements;
      b) Ensure that they have right to terminate the CO agreement at least in the following
           circumstances:
            i.    Change in ownership of the CSP
           ii.    Insolvency or liquidation of the CSP
          iii.    CSP goes into judicial administration
          iv.     CSP is in breach of applicable laws, regulations or contractual provisions
           v.     Significant and material breach of security or confidentiality
          vi.     Demonstrable deterioration to perform the contracted service
      c) Ensure that the minimum termination period is documented in their CO contracts.

L. SUB-CONTRACTING
The CO arrangements expose REs to various risks relating to sub-contracting due to
improper/non implementation of controls by the sub-contractors. For material sub-contracting,
the REs shall comply with the following requirements:
   1. Have visibility of the CSP supply chain by ensuring that the CSP maintains and provides
      an updated list of its sub-contractors.
   2. Consider potential impact of large, complex sub-contracting by the CSPs on their
      operational resilience, and ability to oversee and monitor the emanating risks.
   3. Only permit sub-contracting by CSPs if such arrangements do not give rise to excessive
      operational risks, and sub-contractor agrees to comply with all applicable legal,
      regulatory, contractual, audit and access requirements including granting REs and SBP
      contractual access, audit and information rights.
   4. Review material sub-contracting agreements of the CSP and ascertain that the legal,
      regulatory, operational, and cybersecurity requirements are complied with, throughout
      the supply chain.
   5. Ensure that the CSPs have the capability and capacity to oversee any material sub-
      contracting on an ongoing basis.

M. USER ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND AUTHENTICATION
REs shall implement complete life cycle of user access management for their cloud related
workloads, while complying with the following requirements:
   1. Implement at-least four eye principle for user access administration.
   2. Periodically review user access right changes independently.
   3. Ensure that the use and access of service, generic and administrative accounts are
      controlled and monitored. Moreover, the REs shall implement MFA and limit use of these
      accounts through dedicated machines only.



                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
                                       Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


   4. Create separate account of administrative users for routine operations, and implement
      enhanced password controls (length, complexity, age).
   5. Implement MFA and IP source restrictions (wherever possible) for their users accessing
      cloud environment.
   6. Monitor and document the use of master account, and permit its usage only under
      exceptional circumstances.
   7. Implement access controls for data backups including log data, of cloud related
      workloads.
   8. Ensure that CSPs do not have access to REs’ systems, software and data.

N. CHANGE AND CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
REs shall plan and implement configuration management in conjunction with IT change
management to ensure safe and secure operations of cloud services. In this regard, REs shall
comply with the following requirements for their cloud related workloads:
   1. Implement mechanism for detecting unauthorized changes to cloud environment, and
      configure automated alerts for the changes.
   2. Ensure CM procedures for cloud related workloads are documented and mutually agreed
      with the CSP. These shall at least include change request and approval procedures, change
      prioritization and impact assessment, change reporting, roles and responsibilities,
      timeframe for patching and software releases.
   3. Ensure that the CSPs have well-defined and robust CM controls, and notify the REs in
      advance of the changes.
   4. Ensure that the changes are tested before their implementation on the production
      environment.
   5. Define roles and responsibilities of REs staff for configuration management of the cloud
      environment, and at least segregate infrastructure, security and application roles.
   6. Create and maintain baselines for cloud hosted systems, and periodically review, monitor,
      report and remediate non-compliance with the baselines.

O. INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
Effective and efficient remediation of the incidents requires timely detection and proper
integration with the incident response and management processes. With the increase in
sophistication of cyber-attacks, there is a need to use advance analytics to correlate events across
multiple systems. For incident management, REs shall comply with the following requirements
for their cloud related workloads:
   1. Define and document criteria, performance requirements and procedures for escalation,
      notification, containment and closure of incidents (including IT, cyber incidents) in
      consensus with the CSP(s).
   2. Ensure access to incident and root cause analysis reports of the CSPs.
   3. Designate a SIRT to provide timely response to IT/cyber incidents. In this regard, roles
      and responsibilities of CSP and REs’ teams shall be formalized.
   4. Ensure that CSPs shall provide reasonable access to necessary information to assist in any
      REs’ investigation arising due to an incident in the cloud.
   5. Ensure that the CSPs conduct formal post incident review of the material cloud related
      incidents and provide their report to the RE.
   6. Ensure that ITSC as part of their oversight reviews and discusses cloud related incidents.



                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
                                       Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


    7. Periodically review and test Incident Response Plan of cloud related workloads at least
       once annually, keeping in view cybersecurity as one of key considerations.

P. DATA SECURITY
Outsourcing of the workloads to the CSPs does not relieve the REs from the responsibility of
safeguarding data confidentiality and integrity. In this regard, REs shall:
    1. Encrypt data at rest (including backups) and in transit using strong and non-obsolete
        cryptographic algorithms.
    2. Desensitize the production data before porting or using it on non-production
        environment(s).
    3. Ensure that their data in the cloud environment is clearly identifiable and segregated.
    4. Take appropriate measures for the protection of Personally Identifiable Information (PII);
        and ensure compliance with the requirements of laws of Pakistan at all times. Further,
        REs shall ensure that CSPs do not disclose their data to any third party including foreign
        governments / courts / law enforcement agencies without their consent.
    5. Ensure that CSP does not use their data for any commercial purposes.
    6. Implement reasonable backup and restoration testing mechanism, depending on the
        nature of the workloads in compliance with the defined RPOs. Further, the backup
        mechanism shall have ransomware protection, and the backup restoration testing
        exercise shall be conducted at least on a half-yearly basis.
    7. Classify information assets in terms of their sensitivity, confidentiality & availability, and
        implement additional controls for high value cloud information assets.
    8. Implement controls to prevent unauthorized exfiltration of data from the cloud
        environment. These controls shall include deployment of content inspection technologies,
        controls on data downloading and extraction, monitoring unusual data access, etc.
    9. Ensure that they are notified about any proposed change in the location of their data, and
        have contractual right to reject such change, or terminate the CO arrangement on such
        grounds.
    10. Ensure that data is deleted from all storage locations of the CSP following an exit or
        termination of the CO arrangement, and where applicable, from the systems of any sub-
        contractor by requesting written confirmation from the CSP.

Q. CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY MANAGEMENT
CSPs use cryptographic controls to secure access and segregate customers’ data. Hence, the
security of the cryptographic keys is critical for ensuring the data security. CSPs offer a variety of
key management options/features, which can be selected by the REs for implementation based
on the significance of their workloads. In this regard, the REs shall comply with the following
requirements:
    1. Develop and implement policies and procedures governing the lifecycle of the
        cryptographic material.
    2. Ensure that details of the cryptographic algorithms and other related parameters such as
        key lengths, renewals etc. are reviewed by a subject matter expert.
    3. Ensure that details of the location, ownership and management of the encryption keys
        and HSM are agreed with the CSP and documented.
    4. Ensure that the cryptographic keys are unique and generated only by the REs. Further,
        REs must have the sole ability to administer/manage these keys and HSM.
    5. Periodically change the cryptographic keys in accordance with the international
        standards and best practices.

                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
                                     Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


   6. Ensure that the encryption keys are stored separate from the virtual images and
      information assets.
   7. For material workloads, deploy/implement HSM with due controls.

R. TOKENIZATION
Depending on the sensitivity of data workload, REs may implement tokenization to minimize the
data footprint. While implementing tokenization, REs shall assess and evaluate the features and
data interactions of the tokenization solution. REs shall also ensure that the CSPs do not have
access or control over the tokenization solution.

S. NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
The network structure and logical layout is of paramount importance in any cloud
implementation. Therefore, the REs must implement controls for protection against plausible
threats/attacks including cloud specific attacks, by implementing the following requirements:
   1. Ensure security of their CO arrangements and on premise environments by implementing
      controls at appropriate locations to detect and mitigate security breaches and ongoing
      attacks. These controls shall include but not limited to perimeter security, network
      IDS/IPS, WAF, DDoS protection, etc.
   2. Implement network segmentation based on type of workloads (e.g. production, pre-
      production, quality assurance, development, etc.) and purpose (e.g. end-users, critical
      servers, other servers, middleware, interface, etc.). In this regard, a dedicated network
      segment (i.e. management network) not accessible from other operational segments shall
      be implemented for administration purposes. Further, all internet traffic shall be routed
      through a dedicated network segment (i.e. security segment) and other network
      segments shall not have direct internet access.
   3. Secure traffic between the cloud and on premise environment using a VPN or direct
      network connection with stringent access control rules configured to ensure routing of
      traffic from/to dedicated source and destination IPs.
   4. Monitor and control access to and security of the cloud environments. In this regard,
      regularly review the firewall rules and access lists, especially after any changes.

T. SECURITY TESTING
The dynamic and evolving nature of cyber threats requires a high degree of validation and testing
of security posture of an enterprise, on periodic basis. However, security testing of the systems
and applications in the cloud environment is challenging due to the inherent shared service
model. In this regard, REs shall comply with the following requirements:
   1. Conduct vulnerability assessment, penetration testing and scenario based security testing
      of their systems hosted with the CSPs on periodic basis, at least once annually.
   2. Ensure that CSPs conduct vulnerability assessment and penetration testing for the
      infrastructure and applications managed by them, at least once annually in order to
      provide security assurance to the REs. Further, the REs shall be fully cognizant of the
      scope of such assessments while examining the results.
   3. Ensure that security testing is conducted while taking into consideration various
      scenarios and threats that are unique to cloud services including but not limited to
      hypervisor jumping, weak application programming interfaces, DoS hyper jacking,
      wrapping attacks, cloud malware injection, side channel attacks, etc.


                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
                                       Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


    4. Ensure that all vulnerabilities identified for their cloud related workloads are categorized
       in terms of risk, tracked and rectified (including post validated). For the infrastructure
       and applications managed by the CSPs, REs shall implement alternate mechanism for
       obtaining assurance that the vulnerabilities are timely rectified.
    5. In case of material CO, ensure independent Threat & Vulnerability Assessment of CSP’s
       data centers hosting the data/systems of REs, at least once annually.

U. SECURITY EVENT MONITORING
REs shall establish mechanisms for SEM by complying with the following requirements:
    1. Wherever possible, leverage the controls/tools available in the cloud environment to
       enforce consistent security standards and baselines, automated response, remediation
       and notification.
    2. Integrate CSP related services with their SIEM solutions to provide a detailed analysis of
       the security logs. In this regard, cloud specific incident scenarios with correlation rules
       shall be implemented. Further, AI and ML driven technologies may be explored and
       preferably adopted, where available.
    3. Ensure that cloud related activities are effectively monitored by their SOC on 24x7 basis.

V. OTHER REQUIREMENTS
    1. REs shall monitor and review capacity utilization of their cloud workloads.
    2. REs shall provide adequate training of the cloud environment, to their end-users and
       privileged users.
    3. All security incidents / breaches shall be reported to SBP in compliance with the
       requirements specified in the ‘Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management
       Framework for Financial Institutions’ or as advised by SBP from time to time. Further,
       REs shall conduct investigations to identify the root cause, take appropriate actions to
       prevent recurrence of such incidents in future and fix responsibility for such lapse.
    4. For material workloads, REs shall provide following information to SBP1 one month
       before placing their services with the CSPs:
       a) Name of the CSPs, and their parent company (if any);
       b) Description of the activities and details of data to be placed with the CSP;
       c) Date of commencement / renewal / expiry of services;
       d) Last contract renewal date (where applicable);
       e) Service and Deployment Models.
                                              ******




1Banks, MFBs, DBs and DFIs shall provide the required information to BPRD, whereas designated PSOs/
PSPs shall provide the same to PSP&OD.

                                                                                      Page 16 of 18
                                   Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


                                                                                  Appendix – I

                        Areas to be included in SLAs with CSPs


1. Clear description of the outsourced activity including type of support services to be
    provided (containing activities / processes, service and deployment models, services
    offered, etc.).
2. Roles and responsibilities of contracting parties including responsibilities at the time of
    recovery and resolution.
3. Ownership and access of assets.
4. Term of contract along with renewal and notice periods.
5. Governing law of the agreement.
6. Financial obligations of the parties.
7. Permitted and restricted activities for sub-contracting.
8. Requirement that CSPs shall be solely responsible for the sub-contracting including
    oversight of their sub-contractors.
9. Requirement of obtaining prior written authorization from the RE before transferring
    information assets and services/ servers.
10. Mechanism for data portability and purging in case of exit.
11. Prohibition of access of REs’ systems, software and data to CSP and its sub-contractors.
12. Prohibition on sharing data of RE with any other entity including any host country
    regulatory or law enforcement authorities without taking REs’ prior written approval.
13. Advance notification of change in material sub-contractors of CSPs.
14. Right of the REs to approve or deny material sub-contracting by CSPs or related
    significant changes. Further, REs shall have right to terminate the contract if these
    changes give rise to unacceptable risks.
15. Location(s), where the service will be provided, data kept-processed-stored.
    Requirement for the CSP to provide reasonable notice to the RE if it proposes to change
    the said location(s). Contractual right to reject any proposed change to the location of
    data, or terminate the cloud outsourcing arrangement on such grounds.
16. Data accessibility, availability, integrity, confidentiality and security related provisions.
17. Service levels including qualitative and quantitative performance criteria, and right of RE
    to monitor CSPs’ performance on an ongoing basis (reference to KPIs and KRIs shall be
    made in the SLA).
18. Reporting obligations of the CSP to the RE, including to notify of any development that
    can have material impact on the CSPs’ ability to deliver the agreed service levels.
19. Mandatory insurance coverage (if any) against certain risks.
20. Development and testing of contingency plans for both parties including BCPs.
21. Provisions to ensure that the data owned by the RE can be accessed promptly in the case
    of insolvency, resolution or discontinuation of business operations of the CSP.
22. Access, audit and information rights of the REs and SBP including right to inspect and
    audit, access or seek information, from the CSP and its sub-contractors with regard to the
    outsourced services for assurance, oversight, incident investigation, inspection or any
    other purpose. In case of offshore CSP, REs may rely on internationally recognized third
    party certification and reports made available by the CSP; however, the RE shall include
    contractual right in their SLAs to request for scope expansion of the certifications /
    assessments / audits to cover relevant controls and systems.




                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
                                  Framework on Outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers


23. Assessment, certification and audit reports to be provided by the CSP to REs, generally on
    periodic basis and specifically on demand e.g. System and Organization Controls (SOC)
    level 2 and level 3 reports, on annual basis.
24. Cybersecurity related expectations including data security, network security, security
    testing and monitoring, etc.
25. CM procedures including terms, notification and testing requirements, etc.
26. Threat and Vulnerability Management related requirements including vulnerability
    rectification timeframe based on the risk category, post validation, notification &
    communication, related procedures, etc.
27. Operational and security incident handling procedures including escalation and
    reporting.
28. Termination rights and exit strategies covering both stressed and non-stressed scenarios.
29. The agreement must not contain any lock-in clause.
30. In case of exit, REs shall have contractual rights to continue with the arrangement until
    such time, it is able to switch to a substitute arrangement.
31. Payment and pricing.
32. Contractual remedies including enforceable liquidity damage clauses, etc.
33. Dispute Resolution provisions.
                                         ******




                                                                               Page 18 of 18
